(DOCSP-38875): Edge Server Permissions Guide (#745)
mongodb/docs-app-services: source/edge-server/permissions.txt

.. _edge-server-permissions-guide:

=============================
Edge Server Permissions Guide
=============================

> .. meta::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. meta::
  :keywords: code example
```

   :description: Learn how to configure permissions for Edge Servers and client connections.

> .. facet::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. facet::
   :name: programming_language
   :values: json

.. facet::
```

   :name: genre 
   :values: reference

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Edge Server data access is governed by the intersection of:

- Role-based permissions
- User authentication
- The query used to sync data to the Edge Server instance
- If using Atlas Device SDK, the query used to sync data with the client

> This page explores high-level Edge Server and client permissions configuration,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edge Server supports role-based permissions at the document and field level. This page explores high-level Edge Server and client permissions configuration,
```

     "search": true,
     "read": true,
     "write": true
   }

A Specific Edge Server
``````````````````````

If your data set contains sensitive information that should not sync to
every Edge Server instance, you can use permissions to filter the data so a 
specific instance can only access a subset of the data. Or you can use 
permissions to configure an Edge Server instance to read data, but not write
it.

Because every Edge Server instance is a user, you can use the Edge Server's
``user_id`` to configure permissions for a given instance. You can create a 
role that restricts the data that syncs with a specific Edge Server instance
using a :ref:`rule expression <expressions>` where the 
:ref:`%%user_id <rule-expression-user-expansion>` is the Edge Server's 
``user_id``. You can get the Edge Server instance ``user_id`` from the
:ref:`edge-server-details`, or from the Admin API. [PLACEHOLDER - Add link 
to the relevant Admin API endpoint when the docs PR is merged.]

Read/Write Own Documents
++++++++++++++++++++++++

You can restrict an Edge Server instance to read and write only its own 
documents using the ``user_id``. For example, if an Edge Server instance 

> represents a health care clinic, you might only want to sync data relevant to 

Reviewer: I tripped into a rabbit hole of grammar nerds railing against society's decline as demonstrated by "health care" slowly transforming into one word. but since we're using "healthcare" later in this page...
```suggestion
represents a healthcare clinic, you might only want to sync data relevant to 
```

that clinic's patients:

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "name": "facilityItemsOnly",
     "apply_when": {},
     "document_filters": {
       "write": {
         "facility_id": "%%user.id"
       },
       "read": {
         "facility_id": "%%user.id"
       },
     },
     "read": true,
     "write": true,
     "insert": true,
     "delete": true,
     "search": true
   }

In this example, every document has a ``facility_id`` property whose value is
the Edge Server's ``user_id``. This role means that the Edge Server can only
read and write documents with a ``facility_id`` matching its own ``user_id``.

> Read All, Write Own

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read All, Write Own Documents
```
if we're using this format. do we want to specify these as examples: e.g. "Read/Write Own: Example"?

+++++++++++++++++++

You can configure an Edge Server instance to be able to read all data, but
write only its own data. For example, in a retail setting, an Edge Server 
instance might represent a store inventory system. You might want the store to
have the ability to search across all inventory for an item, but only sell 
items in its own inventory.

> .. code-block:: json

Reviewer: would highlighting help here? it takes a moment to realize what's different about this permission example
```suggestion
.. code-block:: json
   :emphasize-lines: 5-8
```

   {
     "name": "readAllWriteOnlyStoreItems",
     "apply_when": {},
     "document_filters": {
       "write": {
         "store_id": "%%user.id"
       },
       "read": true
     },
     "read": true,
     "write": true,
     "insert": true,
     "delete": true,
     "search": true
   }

Client Permissions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Clients that connect to an Edge Server instance have their own permissions. 
You can think of an Edge Server instance's permissions as a filter between the
data in Atlas and the data that a client can read and write.

In a healthcare setting similar to the Edge server instance example above, the
Edge Server instance may only read and write data that is relevant to its own 

> facility. A client may then further restrict the permissions. For example, a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
facility. You might further restrict those permissions by client. For example, a 
```

Author: I want to keep "client" front-and-center to differentiate from Edge Server, so I don't want to add "you" into the mix here.

patient in the facility may only view their own data.

> You represent these as independent roles within the ``roles`` array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can represent these as independent roles within the ``roles`` array.
```

Author: I avoided "can" here because that brings along an implied optionality, but I'm trying to communicate that this isn't optional - you define Edge Server permissions and client permissions as independent roles within the array.

For example:

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "collection": "Visits",
     "database": "PatientRecords",
     "roles": [
       {
         "name": "facilityItemsOnly",
         "apply_when": { 
           "%%user.type": {
             "$eq": "edge"
           }
         },
         "document_filters": {
           "write": {
             "facility_id": "%%user.id"
           },
           "read": {
             "facility_id": "%%user.id"
           },
         },
         "insert": true,
         "delete": true,
         "search": true,
         "read": true,
         "write": true
       },
       {
         "name": "patientOwnRecordsOnly",
         "apply_when": {},
         "document_filters": {
           "write": {
             "patient_id": "%%user.id"
           },
           "read": {
             "patient_id": "%%user.id"
           }
         },
         "read": true,
         "write": true,
         "insert": true,
         "delete": true,
         "search": true
       }
     ]
   }

> In this example, a ``PatientRecords`` database has a ``Visits`` collection.

Reviewer: same as earlier - I'd bump this above the code. might just be me, but I find it helpful to have the context for the code example first. otherwise I have to re-read the code after reading the explanation

The two roles determine which documents the Edge Server instance can sync,

> and which documents an individual connected client can sync:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and which documents an individual client connected to the instance can sync:
```

- The ``facilityItemsOnly`` role filters items that sync to the Edge Server
  instance. The only items that sync to the facility are records where the
  ``facility_id`` matches the Edge Server instance ``user_id``.
- The ``patientOwnRecordsOnly`` role filters items that can sync to a connected

>   client device. The only items that a connected client can see are visits 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  client device. The only items that sync to a connected client are visits 
```

  where the ``patient_id`` is the client's ``user_id``.

In a setting where you have many different types of clients that should each
have access to a subset of the data, you may define many different client 
roles. For example, in a healthcare setting, you may use different roles for:

> - Patients: provide access to their own medical records *and* address billing 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Patients: provide access to only their own medical records and address billing 
```

  information.

> - Billing specialists: provide access to patient address and billing 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Billing specialists: provide access to all patient address and billing 
```

  information, but not medical records

> - Doctors: provide access to patient medical records, but not address and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Doctors: provide access to all patient medical records, but not address and
```

  billing information.

.. figure:: /images/field-level-permissions.png
   :alt: Documents showing different data available to three different roles - a patient, a billing specialist, and a doctor.
   :lightbox:

> Edge Server Supports Field-Level Permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Field-Level Permissions
```
since we've only been discussing what Edge Server supports, this seems unnecessary

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Edge Server supports :ref:`field-level-permissions`. You can define 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edge Server also supports :ref:`field-level-permissions`, which determine read or write access to specific fields in a document. You can define 
```

- For information about how to define roles and permissions, refer to 
  :ref:`define-roles-and-permissions`.
- Edge Server uses Device Sync to sync data between the Edge Server instances
  and Atlas. Edge Server and client roles must use 
  :ref:`Device Sync-compatible permissions <device-sync-compatibility>`.

.. _edge-server-permissions:

Edge Server Permissions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An Edge Server instance is a user, similar to other incoming client 
connections. The Edge Server must authenticate with Atlas, and it has its 
own permissions to determine what data the instance can read and write.

You can configure rules to generally apply to all Edge Servers in your service.
Or you can get more granular with rules to specify a subset of data that
the Edge Server instance can read and write.

All Edge Servers
````````````````

You can create a role that applies to all Edge Server instances by specifying
an ``applyWhen`` :ref:`rule expression <expressions>` where the 
:ref:`%%user_type <rule-expression-user-expansion>` is ``edge``:

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "name": "edgeServerRole",
     "apply_when": {
       "%%user.type": {
         "$eq": "edge"

>        }

Reviewer 2: I could be wrong, but I believe this works with just "%%user.type": "edge"

     },
     ...customize the permissions for all Edge Server instances...
   }

For example, if your data set does not contain sensitive data, such as a 
weather service, you might add a role stating that Edge Servers can read and 
write all data:

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "name": "readAndWriteAll",
     "apply_when": {
       "%%user.type": {
         "$eq": "edge"
       }
     },
     "document_filters": {
       "read": true,
       "write": true
     },
     "insert": true,
     "delete": true,
     "search": true,
     "read": true,
     "write": true
   }

A Specific Edge Server
``````````````````````

> If your data set contains sensitive information that should not sync to

Reviewer 3: not just sensitive data, IMO. the most common use case is that you dont want the edge server to get all the data because its too much data for just one (storefront, ship, whatever).

Reviewer 3: i guess since this is a permissioning doc, its fair to call it sensitive. feel free to ignore. but, per my comment below, users, could use permissioning to automatically make every edge server see a subset of the data - effectively avoiding having to set the syncing query on each edge server

it.

Because every Edge Server instance is a user, you can use the Edge Server's
``user_id`` to configure permissions for a given instance. You can create a 
role that restricts the data that syncs with a specific Edge Server instance
using a :ref:`rule expression <expressions>` where the 
:ref:`%%user_id <rule-expression-user-expansion>` is the Edge Server's 
``user_id``. You can get the Edge Server instance ``user_id`` from the
:ref:`edge-server-details`, or from the Admin API. [PLACEHOLDER - Add link 
to the relevant Admin API endpoint when the docs PR is merged.]

Read/Write Own Documents
++++++++++++++++++++++++

You can restrict an Edge Server instance to read and write only its own 
documents using the ``user_id``. 

For example, if an Edge Server instance represents a healthcare clinic, you 
might only want to sync data relevant to that clinic's patients.

In this example, every document has a ``facility_id`` property whose value is
the Edge Server's ``user_id``. This role means that the Edge Server can only
read and write documents with a ``facility_id`` matching its own ``user_id``.

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "name": "facilityItemsOnly",

>      "apply_when": {},

Reviewer 3: in most cases, users would probably want to say "this is a rule that governs edge servers" (even if its doing permissioning on a per-edge-server-basis)

that is, i think in this case `"apply_when": "%%user.type=edge"` is still something we should encourage.

a common pattern might be to have documents like
```
{
  store_id: 123,
  owner_id: 456
  more_data: ...
}
```

then, you'd want to create one role with `apply_when edge` such that edge servers can read data `(store_id: %%user.id)`

and another role for all other clients, such that regular users (connecting to either the edge server or the cloud) can read data that belongs to them `owner_id: %%user.id`

     "delete": true,
     "search": true
   }

Read All, Write Own Documents
+++++++++++++++++++

You can configure an Edge Server instance to be able to read all data, but
write only its own data. For example, in a retail setting, an Edge Server 
instance might represent a store inventory system. You might want the store to
have the ability to search across all inventory for an item, but only sell 
items in its own inventory.

.. code-block:: json
   :emphasize-lines: 5-8

   {
     "name": "readAllWriteOnlyStoreItems",
     "apply_when": {},
     "document_filters": {
       "write": {
         "store_id": "%%user.id"
       },
       "read": true
     },
     "read": true,
     "write": true,
     "insert": true,
     "delete": true,
     "search": true
   }

Client Permissions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Clients that connect to an Edge Server instance have their own permissions. 
You can think of an Edge Server instance's permissions as a filter between the
data in Atlas and the data that a client can read and write.

In a healthcare setting similar to the Edge server instance example above, the
Edge Server instance may only read and write data that is relevant to its own 

> facility. A client may then further restrict the permissions. For example, a 

Reviewer 3: nit: its not the client further restricting the permissions, its you (the administrator) setting this up on the cloud

patient in the facility may only view their own data.

You represent these as independent roles within the ``roles`` array.

In this example, a ``PatientRecords`` database has a ``Visits`` collection.
The two roles determine which documents the Edge Server instance can sync,
and which documents an individual client connected to the instance can sync:

- The ``facilityItemsOnly`` role filters items that sync to the Edge Server
  instance. The only items that sync to the facility are records where the
  ``facility_id`` matches the Edge Server instance ``user_id``.
- The ``patientOwnRecordsOnly`` role filters items that can sync to a connected
  client device. The only items that sync to a connected client are visits 
  where the ``patient_id`` is the client's ``user_id``.

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "collection": "Visits",
     "database": "PatientRecords",

>      "roles": [

Reviewer 2: Do you think it is worth calling out here that it is important that the `facilityItemsOnly` role is there before the `patientOwnRecordsOnly` role?

Author: Yes, I meant to mention this but totally forgot. Thanks for calling it out!

       {
         "name": "facilityItemsOnly",
         "apply_when": { 

>            "%%user.type": {

Reviewer 3: note that $eq is not needed here
